Emotional Intelligence
This course is made up of the following modules:
Understanding Emotional Intelligence
Self-Awareness and Emotional Triggers
And Lastly, Using Emotional Intelligence in Real Life.
Welcome! Let’s Talk About Emotions. We all have emotions, and they affect
how we speak, listen, lead, and respond to life.
Emotional intelligence helps us understand those feelings, whether it’s joy,
frustration, or nervous excitement, and handle them with more intention.
This course will help you know yourself better, manage emotional highs and
lows, and connect more deeply with people around you.
It’s not about suppressing emotion. It’s about recognising it, working with
it, and using it wisely. And to bring this to life, we’ll follow someone
relatable!
Meet David. He just started a new job, and he’s full of energy and big ideas.
He’s smart, enthusiastic, and eager to succeed. But sometimes, his emotions
get ahead of him. When he’s excited, he jumps into conversations too quickly.
When he’s praised or happy, he says yes to everything and ends up overwhelmed.
And in moments of tension, he finds it hard to read the room or respond
calmly.
Throughout this course, we’ll follow David’s journey, not to point out what’s
wrong, but to see how emotional intelligence helps him navigate both the
positive and the negative sides of his daily life. But let’s start with
you!
Let's proceed to Module One: Understanding Emotional Intelligence.
By the
end of this module, you’ll be able to:
Define emotional intelligence
Distinguish EI from IQ
Understand the five components of Emotional Intelligence based on Daniel
Goleman’s model
And, Recognise how emotional intelligence shows up in everyday life.
Do You Ever Feel Like Your Emotions Are Running the Show?
Have you ever gotten carried away in a moment, said something you regret,
or felt so excited you made a hasty decision?
What Is Emotional Intelligence?
According to psychologist Daniel Goleman, emotional intelligence is the ability
to recognize, understand, and manage your own emotions, while also responding
well to the emotions of others.
It's helps you stay grounded in moments of pressure, joy, anxiety, or excitement.
It’s about being intentional, not impulsive, with what you feel and how
you act.
Most people are not familiar with emotional intelligence; they
are only familiar with IQ. Both of these are different and very important.
let’s compare them.
Emotional Intelligence which is known as EI, vs Intelligence Quotient, which
is known as IQ.
IQ measures thinking and logic. It helps with test scores, technical skills,
and solving problems.
EI deals with self-awareness, emotion, and connection with others.
IQ might
help you get a job. EI helps you keep it and thrive while working with people.
It’s easy to think intelligence is the only thing that matters. However,
being emotionally intelligent can also help you become emotionally aware
and connect with your surroundings. These are part of the reason EI matters
most times.
Why It Matters in Real Life!
It helps you manage frustration, but also excitement, enthusiasm, and joy.
Without it, emotions can drive overreactions, impulsive decisions, or emotional
crashes. With it, you enjoy the highs, handle the lows, and stay steady
when it matters most. So, how do you spot emotional intelligence in action?
Let’s look at five key skills.
The Building Blocks of Emotional Intelligence.
According to Daniel Goleman, emotional intelligence includes five core skills.
Let’s explore each one with a real-life example.
Self-Awareness: You realise you’re dominating a conversation and shift the
spotlight to others.
That’s self-awareness—knowing what you feel and how
it might affect others.
Self-Regulation: You feel irritated but pause before reacting and say, 'Let’s
figure this out.'
That’s self-regulation—managing how you express emotion.
Motivation: You’re working toward a tough goal, and even when things get
frustrating, you stay focused because it matters to you. That’s motivation,
using emotion to fuel progress.
Empathy: You notice a friend is quiet and ask, 'Want to talk?'
That’s empathy,
tuning in to how others might feel.
Social Skills: During a team meeting, you help smooth over a tense moment
by encouraging collaboration and making sure everyone is heard.
That’s
social skill, navigating relationships and guiding group dynamics.
Emotional
intelligence isn’t about one big moment, it’s about the small, everyday
choices you make. It shows up in how you respond to praise, handle pressure,
and treat people when no one’s looking. Let’s see how well you can spot
it in action.
Try again!!!. The more you practice, the stronger your skills become
Now, go back to David. We'll be using him as an example here. What did he
miss?
He was excited about his idea, but jumped in too soon and interrupted a teammate
without realisingg it.
He wasn’t trying to be rude, he just didn’t notice
how his emotions were showing up in that moment.
What would have helped David in this moment?
You’ve just explored the foundation of emotional intelligence. You’ve Learned!
What Emotional Intelligence Is
How it differs from IQ
And the five key skills that help you grow. Next, we’ll zoom in on Self-Awareness,
and how it helps you better understand and manage your emotional patterns!